[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: How can it
be that over the course of just
two decades, our children are
deemed to be suddenly broken
to the extent that most
of them are recommended
medication for some disorder or
another, not the least of which
is for behavior modification?
I think we can agree that
something is terribly wrong.
I'm thrilled to have our guest
Kim John Payne with us today
to give his perspectives on
how this mad, mad world we've
created is ruining childhood.
He's the author of
"Simplicity Parenting."
Welcome to the show.
I'm so excited to have you here.
>>KIM JOHN PAYNE: It's
great to be here, Regina.
>>REGINA: This is one
of my favorite topics.
And you're the pioneer--
you're a pioneer.
Probably don't want to
lay all of that on you.
But you're a major
pioneer in this field.
And my entry came
because I've seen
the effects of
the Waldorf system
over a long period of time.
And Waldorf was part of
your background as well.
>>PAYNE: Yeah, it was.
Before moving into education,
I trained in psychology.
And I'm OK now.
I always add that
I'm perfectly--
>>REGINA: You're not nuts?
>>PAYNE: Yeah, perfectly fine.
And then, yeah,
Waldorf education,
I was naturally drawn
to that because I
could see right away
in Waldorf education
there was an emphasis
on whole child.
But there was an emphasis
on simplicity and balance,
on each and every day
being balanced for a child,
not only emphasis on
academics but also
an emphasis on
practical arts as well
and how they interface with
the sciences and the academics.
So I could see a
balanced education.
And that's initially
what drew me.
>>REGINA: From there, there
was a point in your life
where you were
living in Jakarta.
And you had already
had some background.
You were already dialed into the
way children were developing.
But this was a really important
part of your discovery,
living in Asia.
Tell us what happened there that
really concentrated your focus.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
As an undergrad,
I was studying--
I got very interested in the
effects of trauma and stress
in the Second World
War, Korea, Vietnam War.
And back then, it was
called trauma response.
And I became very
interested in how similar
the descriptions of
combat veterans who
weren't coping so
well, how similar that
was to the kids I was
working with in a group home.
And it was a puzzle because
it wasn't meant to cross over,
but there was a crossover.
It was often discussed about
nervous, jumpy, hyper-vigilant,
over-controlling, night terrors.
All this was portrayed
as being the things
that combat veterans
were struggling with.
And yet I was seeing the kids
in my group home in pretty
much the same dilemma.
And that was a puzzle.
But then when I went and
volunteered and traveled
in Southeast Asia, but
first in Indonesia and then
in the Thai Cambodian
refugee camps, there again
I saw kids nervous,
jumpy, hyper-vigilant,
over-controlling, and so on.
We could probably, most of
us, get our sort of minds
around that, because these
kids were in a war zone.
But they weren't
combat veterans.
But it was more understandable.
>>REGINA: They dealt
with the insecurity
of that environment every day.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
But again, it was a
crossover thing that
wasn't meant to be happening.
Like the psychological, it's
really strict in its diagnosis.
But here's the
interesting thing,
is when I then made the
jump and I moved to the UK
and was working with just
a regular cohort of kids
from mixed economic
backgrounds, mixed social,
mixed ethnic backgrounds,
there again I saw these kids.
And they looked
like wartime kids,
only they were coming
from typical backgrounds.
And so I came to think of
it as the undeclared war
on childhood.
And it was disturbing but at the
same time very, very revealing.
And most of all, there was
a conundrum and a puzzle
right there in that time.
>>REGINA: Well, and
if you look, then,
to the United
States, which hasn't
had to deal with war
on its own turf--
we were talking
off camera, and you
said the latest statistics
are that the US consumes
92% of the global
Ritalin supply for kids
who are jumpy, controlling,
OCD, all these different things.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
A very significant
amount of medication
is used here in the US.
Other countries are
catching up, unfortunately.
But having traveled
around the world, what
I see anecdotally is where
the pace of life is faster,
the medication need increases.
And the pace of life
here in the US is fast.
And we're got to a
stage where we're almost
living life at a fever pitch.
And the problem is that
it's become the new normal.
It's very ubiquitous.
It's become now accepted.
So if you look around
your neighbors, other kids
at school, and so on,
many parents would say,
well, we're just doing what
everyone else is doing.
So the fast pace, fever pitch,
too much too soon, too sexy
too young, it's
become the new normal.
And a lot of parents
are challenging
that now because
at a gut level--
there's nothing like
parenting to get to your gut,
to get to your heart forces and
to that gut instinctual level.
And a lot of parents
for a long time
now have been figuring, you
know, something is wrong.
Something is up.
This is not OK.
And our gut brain will kind
of trump our head brain.
It just takes longer.
And that's why maybe
10, 15 years ago,
talking about
simplicity, balance,
and dialing back life for kids
was a little counterculture,
frankly.
Whereas now it's right in
the middle of what so many
folk are talking about.
It's become a very
common conversation
piece, is that this is crazy.
This doesn't feel good.
Do we just have to accept this?
And I guess that's where
"Simplicity Parenting" stepped
right into the middle--
almost unwittingly,
but stepped right into
the middle of that.
Because it offers--
>>REGINA: It was
filling a mass need.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
It offers solutions rather
than just observations.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>PAYNE: And the solutions
are very, well, simple.
>>REGINA: They are.
But there are things that
need to be considered
that most people have not
considered, because they feel
the pressure by
their parental peers,
for example, that oh my
god, that little kid already
knows how to read
and he's only three.
And our son can't read yet.
And it really becomes--
well, and as you say,
it is ubiquitous.
So there's nothing to
check one's self against.
It's just feeling like,
oh, our family, our child,
our children are
all falling behind.
And I want to just
set a little scenario.
And this is based on
the Waldorf system,
but it embraces
those principles.
So I want to set
this, before we go
into the story of little James.
In my son's class, I've
had the observation
now over the course
of, in our family,
many years-- between
my sister's children
and my son, 30 years
of watching them
go through that
particular system, where,
again, simplicity is
the rule, so to speak.
And one thing I noticed,
I've noticed repeatedly,
is that the kids in our family,
but also the kids in, say,
my son's class, who are
now in their early 30s,
they came out of it somehow
more alive, creatively intact
but more so.
You could see by the time
they were 12, 13, 14,
really what their passions
and souls' desires were.
And they stayed
very close to it,
right down to one kid, who
he was kind of a slacker
and he loved to smoke weed
and everyone thought, what's
going to happen to him?
Least likely to succeed.
He's probably doing the best
financially because he really
was into the
anthroposophical gardening,
biodynamic gardening.
He became a master
marijuana hybridizer
for medical facilities,
for dispensaries.
>>PAYNE: Go figure.
>>REGINA: So yeah,
even him, least
likely to succeed actually lived
his passion, which was weed.
And I thought it
was so interesting.
>>PAYNE: We've got
to be quick to add,
that's not a class they
take in the school.
>>REGINA: -No, it is not.
It is not.
But he did pay attention
to the gardening.
And so I just say that kind of
in jest, but that all of them
ended up being the human beings
that you could see that seed
contained very early in
life, veterinarians, singers,
artists, and more.
Even lawyers.
>>PAYNE: Especially
scientists, actually.
A lot of kids who graduate
from Waldorf schools
are very attracted
to the science.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And we're going to
now back engineer
that story as to how that
effect can come about,
by talking about little
James in your first chapter.
You changed all of their names.
But little James, oh,
I just felt so badly
for him, this terribly
hyper-vigilant little child.
But it was the result of
family dynamics trying to help
the kid grow up too fast.
>>PAYNE: It's almost
like we're trying
to pack 18 years of development
into the first eight years.
And it's concertinaed up.
And it compresses.
And it stresses as it
compresses children.
And for some kids, their heads
become like little light bulbs,
and they become
very switched on.
They become very
anxious, nervous,
they're picking up details.
And they basically go into a
little bit of a fight or flight
response.
And for James, what
he was doing is
that he had been given access
to a ton of adult information.
And he'd internalized it and
almost bird-like, very nervous,
he would just sit in the
backseat of a car and just
really just run off with
all these things that
were going on in the world.
>>REGINA: Especially
environmental, global,
catastrophe.
>>PAYNE: Very disaster minded,
really worried about the world.
My concern when I was working
with that family, when
I was speaking with
them, was that you
don't want to burn
your kid out with too
much of that information too
soon, because then by the time
they get to 16, they're done.
They're done with it.
If you want a 16, 17,
18-year-old or into their 20s
to take hold of the
world, to really change
the things that are wrong, to
make it a more beautiful world,
when they're
little, we're really
well-advised to actually give
the children a beautiful world,
to let them know there's
beauty in the world.
There's beautiful people.
There's safe places to be.
It's good.
This is a good world.
If we want to have
them in the later life
to make it a good
world, then we have
to give them the template of
what a good world looks like,
because otherwise how are
they going to change it?
What do they change
it to if they've been
raised on a diet of disaster?
If they've been raised on
a diet of global warming,
of conflicts around the world.
And basically any information
that one gives a child younger
than the age of nine
should be something
they can do something about.
My basic rule of thumb--
there's two of them, really.
The first one is that if they
can't do anything about it,
don't tell them.
If they can't enter into it
and really figure something out
where they can take
part, don't tell them.
And the other rule of thumb
is I ask myself four really
basic questions before I say
anything in front of my kids
when they were little.
Is it true?
Is it kind?
Is it necessary?
And will it make them feel safe?
That crucial piece
of, does it make
me feel this is a good world,
this is a beautiful world?
I remember one dead who
was a serial explainer.
Do you know what I man?
He would explain everything.
And I was speaking
with him and his wife.
And they agreed--
their child wasn't
one that talked a lot about it.
It was a child who shrank
back from them, who was really
pulling away from them.
And they were worried.
She was four years old, and yet
she was not engaging with them.
And they wondered if
something was wrong.
Is there a diagnosis?
And so they came to me.
And my diagnosis was,
don't talk so much.
It's kind of a weird diagnosis,
but just quiet it all down,
particularly about
the over-analyzing,
particularly the moment would
talk about global catastrophe,
the dad would super-analyze.
And so one day they were sitting
on the edge of the bathtub,
having agreed this.
And the daughter
picked up a toothbrush.
And she was holding
it up to the light,
and she was noticing
the colors that
were projected on the wall.
And she was holding
it up and saying,
look, Daddy, pink, now blue.
And the dad sat on
the edge of the bath
and began a color
analysis lecture.
>>REGINA: Telling them
about the spectrum?
>>PAYNE: Yeah, really.
And the mother
gave him the look--
you know, the
look-- because they
had agreed that they would
only speak about things
that brought wonder and awe.
That was their template-- wonder
and awe to the four year old.
In awe of the world, it
is a wonderful place.
And so he stopped,
and then he just
enjoyed the pinkness and the
spectrum and the blueness.
And she walked around with that
toothbrush for days, pulling it
out wherever there was sun.
And wherever Daddy was there--
should we look here, Daddy?
And they would look again.
>>REGINA: So she
was re-engaging.
>>PAYNE: She was
re-engaging with him.
And the dad, when he
told this simple story
about the toothbrush, teared up.
Because he said, I had no idea
that my adult conversations
and my analyzing was
disengaging me from the most
precious thing in my life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And you know, you were
talking about the analysis
before you spoke that you
went through in terms of what
you shared with your children.
And it seems to me, maybe the
number one would be safety.
Will it make my child feel safe?
Because the reality
is, children are
being born into what is being
spun as a very dangerous world
from everything externally.
>>PAYNE: Right.
And if they buy
into I'm not safe,
what happens is,
with my interest
in neuro-psych and
into neurobiology,
is it's pretty much now accepted
that in the first couple
of years of life, the only
question a little child wants
to have answered is, am I safe?
Am I safe?
Can I trust?
Can I take the world in?
Can I give myself to the world?
Can I just be a
part of all this?
Now, if there's a lot of
stress going on and a lot
of conversation about things
that a child just cannot
understand, can't take a
hold of, what happens is that
the child stays in a slightly
arrested neurological state.
And so all that wonderful
whoosh of brain development that
comes through into the age
of six or seven years old
is actually
dramatically inhibited
because they still haven't
answered that question,
am I safe.
So they stay in that
kind of safety brain.
They still stay
in the protected--
I've got to protect myself.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk
about it from a brain function
point of view, in the frontal
lobe development and fear,
and what fear does
to inhibit that.
>>PAYNE: Well, you see, the
amygdala, the fight or flight,
the reptilian brain,
in modern life,
it's almost become the reptile
with a crown, the lizard king.
It's become the ruler of our
brain-- that fight or flight,
I would add, freeze
or flock brain.
Because our kids are being
given so much information
via screens, via our unguarded
conversations, which I think
are just as troubling as
screens, when we dial back
those conversations, when
we can dial them back,
the frontal lobes
start to kick in,
which is the
collaborative brain,
the empathy brain,
the learning brain,
the brain that just
welcomes newness,
welcomes all kinds of new stuff.
When we dial the amount of
stuff that our children have
to digest, what happens is
that their collaborative,
creative brain really
starts to fire.
And that's all about learning.
That's all about being a friend.
That's all about being a good
brother or a good sister,
being fun, being creative.
So what a lot of
parents have discovered
is that when they simplify
and balance their lives,
a lot of the niggly behavior
that happens between kids,
a lot of the stuff that's antsy
between kids, very quickly--
and this is not surprising,
because in a sense,
the brain is fast.
In terms of the hormones,
they can flush the system.
Within a couple of weeks,
you see a real change
in the behavior of
the child, being
able to relax, being
able to sleep better.
For little children
particularly, they
can sleep better.
They can eat better.
And they can potty better.
Because if you think about it,
if a child doesn't feel safe,
a little one, what's their
fallback control mechanism?
Sleeping, eating, and pooping.
And they'll try and hang
on and control that,
so that they can't let you
go out the room at night
because they're afraid to
be on their own, and so on.
So those three key things,
because the "Simplicity
Parenting" movement is
so large-- we have 600,
700 trainers, coaches
around the world,
and just countless
ten of thousands--
>>REGINA: Exploding, though.
>>PAYNE: Exploding.
The book is translated
into I think it's now 12
and soon to be 15 different
languages, and so on and so on.
So what's interesting about
that is we have people
from very many
different cultures
reporting exactly the same
thing, that when they simplify
and balance family
life, what happens
is the connection increases.
Because really, all
"Simplicity Parenting"
really is is a vehicle
for deeper connection.
Simplicity is nothing
in itself, per se.
It opens up a space where we
can deeply connect to our kids.
That's really what it's about.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, now, let's
talk about a day--
say if you were
doing a consultation,
a day in a family's life,
a day of observation.
And you've said,
there are people
that you will make that
offer and say, look,
you can let me into your
home to observe you for a day
or go through months and
months of counseling.
Your choice.
And they'll look at
each other and say,
we'll take the counseling.
>>PAYNE: Yeah, two or
three years of therapy.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>PAYNE: Well, we have
"Simplicity Parenting"
counselors all around the
world doing exactly this now.
They'll spend a day--
we've learned to spread it
over a couple of weeks.
So a couple hours of early
morning, seeing the children.
Then you'll get up.
And then a couple of
days later, visit again.
And you get a picture
of the parents' day.
And one of the really
interesting pieces about that
is that most parents--
many parents now
are understanding that there
is a benefit to dialing back.
This has just gone crazy.
Just it's too much going on.
And what's really interesting
is that of the discoveries
that I came across
fairly early on
was that when you start
simplifying and balancing
a child's life,
things start to shift.
Now, I mentioned some a moment
ago, but slightly more--
you know, a little more inflamed
than that is that you have--
I've worked with so many
children who are so-called ADD,
ODD, PDD, OCD,
there's a lot of D's.
We can take our pick.
And I'm not disputing
that there are these D's.
Sure thing.
But when parents start
simplifying and balancing,
that challenging behavior
and emotional presentation
becomes softer, and it
becomes just quirky.
The same thing that
is a disorder when
you add cumulative stress, under
the radar cumulative stress,
all a disorder is is
an inflamed quirk.
That's all it is.
If you've got a busy kid--
>>REGINA: And we're all quirky.
>>PAYNE: Well, who
isn't quirky, right?
But you add stress to that,
and it slides along a spectrum.
So the busy kid becomes ADD.
The orderly kid becomes OCD.
And so on and so on.
But the simple
answer-- and this is
what's so hopeful about this,
is that you start simplifying
and balancing, kids who perhaps
oppositional and defiant
and they're pushing
back hard against you
or against their teachers
or against their brothers
and sisters, they start moving
back along that spectrum,
so to speak, and they
become just quirky again.
I'm not disputing that we
don't all have tendencies,
but it's the cumulative,
under the radar
stress that as a society
we've come to accept.
And many, many parents
now are not accepting it,
so they slide it back.
They simplify and balance.
And they feel like they've
got their little boy
or girl back again.
It is so touching.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, let's start with
their environment.
And you're really
big on less stuff.
>>PAYNE: Well, yeah.
Less stuff because
one of the things--
>>REGINA: Let's
start with babies.
I mean, OK, a baby's born.
Everybody brings a lot
of stuff to the baby.
The room starts filling up.
>>PAYNE: It's like
a toy tsunami.
Yeah, from the
unrelenting parents,
in-laws, Christmas givers.
One of the things that
I noticed-- and this
wasn't an invention.
My nickname was Dr. Trash Bag.
>>REGINA: You show up
with, what are they called,
the handyman size bags?
Big garbage bags, black ones.
>>PAYNE: And it wasn't
just out of coincidence,
because I would ask the
parents, because I'm
the simplicity guy, right?
So what do you want to simplify?
And a lot of
parents would choose
to simplify their environment.
So we would go into
a child's bedroom.
I'd stand with a bag,
and in would go the toys.
One parent was usually gleeful.
The other was kind of ashen.
And we would be in with all
those really annoying toys,
the toys that do things
where you push buttons.
>>REGINA: The ones
that need batteries.
>>PAYNE: The ones
that need batteries,
they were always first.
Disemboweled Barbies.
I mean, lots of stuff.
And then we did the same
thing with toys, with books,
with clothes, just simplifying
and establishing a toy library.
Same with books.
Books are precious.
I mean, what is
rare is precious.
We forget about
the power of less.
What is rare is precious.
So I've seen countless
numbers of kids using books
as construction material.
And it makes me wince.
So fewer books, fewer clothes.
And it just feels fabulous.
Some parents ask me, do
you do this with the kids?
And my answer is, well,
it depends on your level
of masochism, frankly.
No, no, no, no, no.
No, you just do it.
You just go in,
and you just do it.
And we worry too much
about it as parents,
because the kids
come back-- now,
I'm talking about
thousands of kids, right?
Because our coaches do this,
because it's a fairly simple
little training.
It'd be kind of
ironic if the training
to be a "Simplicity Parenting"
coach was complicated.
That'd be too funny.
But now we have
thousands and thousands
of parents who have done this.
And it's only a handful of times
ever has a kid objected to it.
Because they come in, and
it's their space to play.
>>REGINA: To breathe.
>>PAYNE: To breathe, to be.
And one of the comments
we get over and over
is that parents
comment, well, hang on,
how is it that my kids
are playing better?
Because there's less
toys, why are they
playing so much more with
each other and cooperating?
Again, the answer is
in the brain science,
because if you have
less stuff, you
have to get creative
with how you use it.
If you get creative
with how you use it,
the limbic system and
back to the frontal lobe
starts to kick in, and that's
the collaborative brain.
So less means more cooperation.
So that's the first kind of--
>>REGINA: And more imagination.
>>PAYNE: Absolutely.
And then this
wonderful plaything
called nature starts kicking in.
Kids start going out
and doing-- and I've
notice that the best
toys, the keepers,
the toys that kids
really gravitate towards,
is not the fancy gift.
It's the box it came in.
>>REGINA: I was just
going to make a comment.
A woman that I had
such respect for,
just a beautiful little sparkly
woman with tattoos all over
and sparkles on her cheeks,
when she would go somewhere
with her little kids
who were high-energy
but adorable and creative, she'd
drag along an old cardboard
box, a moving box.
That's it.
And then she'd say, now,
remember who was up on the hill
yesterday.
And she'd construct the box.
And that became the castle, the
home, whatever they were doing.
>>PAYNE: The rocketship,
the whatever.
But the more children
change that object, the more
the collaborative brain
starts kicking in.
That's why toys
with that batteries
cause so many arguments,
because they're not cooperative.
You sit and you
passively push a button,
and the thing does something.
And so it's not actually
stimulating any cooperation,
because it does just one thing.
That's what it does.
>>REGINA: And you can fight
over possession of it.
That's as far as it goes.
>>PAYNE: Right,
because you don't
have to cooperate to
actually make it do anything.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And the rooms that you painted
the picture of in your book
with words, I love
it, because you're
talking about rooms that
now, there's less stuff,
you can see what stuff there is.
You can actually focus--
maybe your 30 or 40
books have been narrowed down.
They've been put away
somewhere, where you only
see five or six books.
And I love the part where
in this one girl's room
you had swaths of color fabric,
string, and clothespins.
And she was just-- and
she was a little kid
that had some control issues.
And she was just lost in
creating these little houses
and environments
out of the fabric.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
And because she's lost in that
world, when a child gets lost
in the play world, something
very precious is happening,
isn't it?
And we look at it.
And I don't mean to be
overly scientific about it,
but when a child is lost
in that deep creative play,
they're processing.
They're actually
processing the day.
They're processing
the stressors.
They're actually
working through a lot.
But they're working through
it, in a sense, metaphorically.
They'll play out the
stresses of the day.
You listen to their chatter,
and if they happened
to have been to the
doctor's clinic,
they're just chatting about it
as they put the things around.
And their processing.
Now, deep play takes time.
Deep play takes time.
And this is one of these
pillars of simplicity
because we've forgotten about
the need for boredom, what
I call the gift of boredom.
We've got to give kids
the gift of boredom.
Because if my kids come to me
and say, Daddy, we're bored.
There's nothing to do.
My response is, oh.
Oh, dear.
That's it.
>>REGINA: That's it.
Find something to do.
>>PAYNE: That's it.
20 minutes later-- and by
the way, for that 20 minutes,
separate them.
That's a little tip there.
But 20 minutes later, they're
creating, they're constructing,
they're doing.
When kids say we've got nothing
to do, that they're bored,
we've got to
out-bore the boring.
We've got to be
even more boring.
>>REGINA: Don't give
them a ton of options.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
And particularly
resist the screen.
Resist taking them
to the screen.
Because we think the screen is
creative, and it kind of is.
There's all sorts
of things to do.
But what we forget is that
it's someone else's creativity.
It's not the child's creativity.
It's someone else's.
And that's not doing
much inside for the child
that is passively observing
someone else's creativity.
And again, nothing much is going
on for a child in comparison
to that deep creative play.
>>REGINA: Well, and
that's what you do too.
Once you clear the room
out, sometimes you'll
add a few things back in.
For example, they'll always have
a fat box of crayons and paper.
>>PAYNE: Tools.
>>REGINA: Tools.
And maybe little
LEGO pieces and toys.
>>PAYNE: Yeah, and
big wooden blocks.
Big things they can
get their arms around.
Tools are fabulous.
You can get them in garden
centers now, child sized.
But real tools.
Not plastic tools
that just are fake,
that just tell great
big kind of lies.
That's not a hammer.
That's a weird thing.
It's plastic.
It's light.
It doesn't weigh anything.
>>REGINA: Air-filled
thing, yeah.
>>PAYNE: That means the world
is not telling me the truth.
I've seen little boys get a
hold of those plastic hammers
and look at them and
say, what is this?
>>REGINA: So give them
little man toys and tools.
>>PAYNE: Yeah, Give the
boys and girls these tools.
Let them go out and
really dig, because when
they dig-- a lot of children
learn through imitating us.
So if they're out with their
shovel but it's a real shovel
and they're digging beside us,
or they're sawing besides us,
or they're working
beside us, that's
how little children learn
because that's the mirror
neurons in the brain.
They see what we're
doing, they mirror it,
and then they bring
it into their actions.
That's how kids develop,
not through passively
sitting and watching hours
and hours of screens a day.
The average American
kid 12 to 18 years old
now watches-- the Kaiser Family
Foundation study in 2011,
it's seven and a half
hours of screen a day,
and that's discounting
screens at school.
Right?
It's a full-time job.
And it really,
really is concerning
huge numbers of parents.
This has just gone crazy.
>>REGINA: Well, now-- so another
sector of parents would say,
I'm not allowing my children
to sit in front of the screen.
And so instead what
they'll do is maybe
occupy them with loads of
lessons of all different kinds.
We go to our French
lesson when we're five,
and then after that go to
ballet and then maybe whatever.
>>PAYNE: And then to
psychotherapy to cope with it
all.
>>REGINA: Yeah, to
psychotherapy, and then
to soccer practice.
>>PAYNE: And then more
psychotherapy, or medication.
>>REGINA: And you
say in the book,
you're not against learning
and growing and having
rich experiences.
But tell us where
the dividing line
is between enough and too much.
>>PAYNE: Well, I'm not-- like,
you mentioned screens, Regina.
I'm not against screens.
I'm just for human relationship.
That's the thing
that screens and too
packed a life are displacing.
Like, did you ever have
a play date in your life?
>>REGINA: A play date?
>>PAYNE: A play date?
Did you ever have--
>>REGINA: What's that mean?
>>PAYNE: Right.
I know.
Play dates, that's
what kids have now.
They have play dates.
They don't play.
>>REGINA: Oh, god, no.
You just went out and played.
>>PAYNE: Right.
I didn't have a
play date either.
>>REGINA: You have to make
it-- you have to put it
in the calendar to play now?
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
And you deliver
kids, and they play.
Yeah, you didn't know?
Oh, there you go.
>>REGINA: No.
I mean, I finished the child
rearing thing a while ago.
>>PAYNE: You were outside
of the play date thing?
And you know, we're fine.
I think we're OKish, aren't we?
But what I'm suggesting is
that the ballet on Monday,
soccer on Tuesday, that
the tutoring on Wednesday--
>>REGINA: Plus homework
by the age of four.
>>PAYNE: And the homework,
and the hour or two-- homework
is a huge problem.
I'm not a big fan of homework.
I'm a big fan of home life.
And homework is robbing us
of the time for home life.
Screens are robbing us
of time for home life.
Scheduling is robbing us
If we can just-- this is the
weird thing about simplicity
and "Simplicity Parenting"
movement, this whole community,
is that someone
said to me way back,
this is a really
weird book, Kim,
because-- she had read
all these parenting books
and she said, I got
this and I was all
ready to have to take notes.
And I didn't take a
single-- like, you're not
saying do anything.
You're not saying do a
single thing in a whole book.
>>REGINA: It's
more about undoing.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
Don't do, because I'm not a
big fan of parenting books,
which I know is weird
because I write them.
But I'm not a big fan of
them because what they do
is they de-alpha the parent.
They subjugate the parent.
Our kids need the parent to
be in the alpha position,
in that "I am a governor
of the family" state.
And a lot of parenting
books feel like you're
being placed below the expert.
There's the expert, and
then there's you below that.
"Simplicity Parenting" is just
saying, just strip it away.
Dial it back.
Do less.
But the really interesting
piece about this
is that what it's not suggesting
is wanting to go back in time,
wanting somehow that
this is a bad world.
It's a wonderful world.
It's a beautiful world.
And you only have to look
into your child's eyes
when they're out in the woods
to know how beautiful they're
seeing through those eyes.
It's a beautiful world.
But one of, I think,
the key points
of when you simplify and balance
and you dial back as a parent
is that you're actually putting
your child on a trajectory
to really succeed
in a modern world,
because the modern
world is changing.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And I wanted to get into that.
But there's one thing
I wanted to catch
while we're right there.
It's not only your children
having too much stuff
and having too many lessons
and being pushed too fast.
There also is a point
at which there are too
many choices for
a child to make.
So if you'll just take
a moment to talk about,
where do you as a
parent say, this
is what we're going
to do, versus, honey,
we can do this,
this, this, and this.
Where is that line again too?
This is confusing
for a lot of parents.
>>PAYNE: It really is.
Like, if you're walking down
the beach, you're on vacation
and you're with your
two young children.
And you say to
your two boys, now,
who would like the
red bucket, and who
would like the yellow bucket?
You're done.
The day is done right there.
There's no more.
I'm not a big fan
of choices ahead
of a child's neurological
ability to make them.
We are giving children choices--
>>REGINA: The red and blue
we can make fairly early on.
>>PAYNE: --way too young.
But then they'll
argue about which,
who-- it's what I think
of as "you may" choices.
Now, a "you may" choice is
to set three cereals out
on the counter in the morning
and saying to your children,
you may choose any
one of these three,
because I'm OK with that.
Maybe you don't say
I'm OK with that,
but inwardly, because
I'm OK with that.
And then rather than
sitting out three or four,
one is the incredibly
expensive organic granola,
right down to cocoa pops, they
choose the cocoa pops, right?
And then you say, now, Sophia,
was that a poor choice,
a good choice, or
the best choice?
And she knows that that
wasn't the best choice.
And so over and over, by giving
our kids too many choices,
we stress them.
And we make them feel that
they're disappointing us.
And it disconnects us from kids,
because a little child's choice
is usually based
around their senses.
If you say to a little
child, if you've
got a new fancy
refrigerator and there's
a freezer at the
bottom-- not at the top
like it used to be in the
old days, at the bottom.
And you say, now, Alexander,
do not put your tongue
on the freezer tray.
>>REGINA: Moth to a flame.
>>PAYNE: Right.
And you'll hear, Daddy, Daddy--
and he's put his tongue.
Why has he put--
why, I told you--
he's put his tongue on it
because little children make
choices through touching,
through feeling.
They don't make
morally guided choices,
cognitively based choices.
They make it through their body.
And yet so many
parents have bought
into this giving cognitive,
moral, ethical choices
to children, ahead of that
neurological development.
Our kids don't understand cause
and effect in a social sense,
in an emotional sense.
They understand
cause and effect,
crossing right left brain,
through their little bodies.
>>REGINA: Like getting your
tongue stuck on the ice tray.
>>PAYNE: Through their bodies.
And so I'm not suggesting
that children shouldn't
have any choices, but the
choices are "you may" choices,
where then you as the adult,
as the governor of the family
state, keeping the family
safe and warm and secure,
allow a child to make a choice.
That says to a child, I can
choose, but my daddy or my mama
is in charge and
keeping me safe,
as opposed to giving
them all kinds of choices
that they don't have the cause
and effect understanding yet
to make and then inferring that
they've made the wrong choice.
That just stresses a child.
And we don't mean.
No one wakes up
thinking, I wonder
how I can stress my kids today.
No one does that, right?
But that's in effect what too
many choices too young do.
It disconnects us.
And our kids start
pulling back from us,
or start pounding on
us, start getting--
I remember one little girl
at the front of the school,
the mother-- I knew exactly
what book she'd been reading,
by the way, the mother,
the parenting book,
because she said
to the child, now,
would you like to
come back to my work,
go to Daddy's work,
would you like to
go to the barn,
would you like to go to the
space shuttle-- I don't know,
she was giving her--
>>REGINA: What overwhelm.
>>PAYNE: And she was down at
her level, making eye contact.
Now, the little girl just was
getting more and more tense.
And she said, don't ask me.
And the mother said, now, why
don't you want me to ask you?
Is it because you're
feeling frustrated?
Is it because you're--
and the little girl,
she just hauled off and she
kicked her mother so hard,
and she just ran.
And I thought, you go, girl.
What a completely
appropriate response,
because the little girl was
done with just the stress
of all that.
We're stressing our
kids when we give them
those choices which are based
on social and emotional cause
and effect.
They can't go there.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about boys specifically.
This is a big one.
And again, reflecting
on the Waldorf system.
I understand it more now,
but oftentimes the boys
would end up doing two
years of kindergarten
while the girls would pass on
after one year of kindergarten.
Why is this?
What is it that our boys
need that the girls may not?
>>PAYNE: One of the
things that we've
noticed over these long years
now of just observing boys
in contemporary life
is that particularly up
until about the age of 12,
they just take a little longer
to process.
They need to sit with things.
They need to explore things
a little more practically.
I'm being general here.
I don't mean this
only with boys.
>>REGINA: Yes, and this is a
general question I've asked.
>>PAYNE: But they
need just that-- one
of the things boys
really thrive on,
and this has been said by-- it's
so beautiful to hear this over
and over from parents-- is
how much better their boys are
with the simplicity regime.
They really benefit from it,
because what a lot of boys do,
they just need more time.
They need more space.
Boys want to explore stuff.
They don't just accept
it because we've said so.
They want to explore it.
They want to check it out.
They want to really
look into it.
They want to know how it works.
That all takes time.
And it's a real concern
for me that our modern,
fast-paced life is really
disconnecting boys.
And then the boys turn
to a pseudo-connection
of technology.
Because we're hurrying
them along so much,
they actually seek in droves
escape routes of technology.
When we slow it down, a lot of
the kids who are tech-addicted
or on the edge of being screen
addicted, parents say to me,
how can I get my kid back?
How can I get them out
of this virtual world,
that I virtually don't
exist for them anymore?
It's this virtual world.
One of the answers is to
slow down the real world
so that the boy can actually
feel confident to enter back
into it.
Because in the virtual world,
that will work at their pace.
They can actually be in
control of the pacing
of those video games.
The pacing of that is
within a boy's control.
If the real world
starts to slow down,
then a boy can feel confident
to enter back into it.
>>REGINA: And you
say that boys need
a sense of industry-- I
think the words you used
were industry and purpose.
And we'll talk about
girls in a minute,
but they're not actually
being given the opportunity.
>>PAYNE: Right.
And that's where the
countless numbers of parents
who create a more spaciousness
around their home life, who
basically push back and
become almost like sentinels,
they become like
guardians, like gatekeepers
of how much of the world they're
going to let into their family.
Because that's our job.
We're our family's sentinels.
We stand there.
Who goes there?
No, he's not going to do five
nights a week soccer practice.
He's seven.
We're not going to do it.
Well, he won't get
on the travel time.
Big deal.
Because over 81% of all kids
who do Little League prior
to the age of 12 and
get involved in really
competitive sports drop
out before the age of 16.
This was a part of our research
for my last book, "Beyond
Winning," this smart parenting
in a toxic youth sports world.
We want our kids when they're 16
to be passionate about sports,
to get really into it, because
there's a lot of other stuff
we don't want them involved in.
>>REGINA: Right.
And you want that
energy directed
in a really healthy manner.
>>PAYNE: But if we push
them too hard too young,
81% don't go there.
Less than 20% of kids
go forward with sports
because they've been
pushed too young.
Now, that's both
a reality and also
a metaphor for many other
aspects of life for kids.
So what I'm suggesting
is that when
you start to open it
up and slow it down,
both boys and girls
can enter more into it
with confidence that
this is good stuff.
>>REGINA: And boys have
a natural intensity.
And we'll chastise them
for that sometimes.
And you're saying this
is the nature of the boy.
They want to dig down.
>>PAYNE: Boys generally will
want to dig down into it,
isn't that right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PAYNE: You had
a boy, didn't you,
and they want to
dig down into it.
They want to go deeper and
deeper and deeper into it.
They don't want to
be just lifted up
after 15 minutes of just
figuring out how to do--
and then off to soccer practice,
off to music, off to tutoring.
This is the interesting piece,
because when boys can dig down
into that kind of thing,
that's their portal
to understanding themselves.
That's self-esteem.
That's who they are.
That brings them to a
sense of values, of morals.
That will translate later
into higher kind of values.
But when they're little, it's
getting to know the world.
That's the foundation for
the bigger moral stuff.
>>REGINA: Right.
And let's go there.
What happens in the world
that we've created now,
with Ritalin and no time to dig
down deep for the boys, when
it's time for boys and
girls to start interacting?
>>PAYNE: It's multi-layered,
but one of the things
that-- I don't want
to be seen as being
kind of anti any medication.
Medication for me
is like scaffolding.
The aim of medication,
if one goes that route,
is to get to the place that
needs strengthening, to get
to that scaffolding, to climb
up, secure the structure,
and then take the
scaffolding away.
And what secures
a structure more
than anything else is giving
a child time, and therefore
connection to you,
to the parent.
A child who develops a deeper
and deeper sense of base camp,
my family is my
refuge, that child
is going to answer that basic
question we spoke about of,
I feel safe.
I feel secured.
I can launch from this place
out into the world and return.
It's like a little
one of two years old.
When you put them in a
park, a strange place,
and you put them down, they
climb up you like a squirrel
and burrow into you.
And then they look out and
they'll go a little bit,
and they'll come back.
They'll go a little
further and come back.
And eventually
they'll go right out
and they'll stand five inches
away from the other child's
face, staring at each other.
They'll play for a little
while and come back.
Now, little children
actually do that.
But it's the same
thing with teenagers.
A teenager is like a
newborn, but it's just
the newborn emotional
world-- just as vulnerable,
just as vulnerable as the
body of a newborn child,
of an infant.
But now it's a newborn
emotional life.
And they'll go out,
and they'll come back.
But they need a
place to come back
to that is not fraud,
that is not frenetic.
And that's what simplicity
and balance does,
is it gives our older kids,
as well as our younger kids,
that place of decompression,
that place of safety that they
can come back to and then
go boldly out into the world
and really be confident,
because then they can come back.
And if they get a bump, an
emotional bump or a bruise,
or a physical bump
or a bruise, they
know they can come back and
receive us because we're there.
And I don't mean we're always
home with milk and cookies.
I mean there there,
available to them.
There's a connection.
And for boys and girls,
that's what balancing out
life and resisting this
kind of scheduling tsunami
that is coming at
so many families--
>>REGINA: And the
whole notion-- and you
said at the very beginning
of the conversation,
too sexy, too young, too fast.
How does that impact?
>>PAYNE: Probably like you,
my grandfather and my father
were a part of what we call
the Greatest Generation.
They grew up in the
ashes of the Second World
War, the economic depression.
And we call them the
Greatest Generation,
because they created
so much out of nothing.
Why is it in modern
times do we think
that giving our children
everything will make them
great?
We need to also have them be
able to take hold of the world
without all this
super structured life.
One of the figures that
really is very interesting
is that 53 million adults
in the United States
now are freelance.
38% of all millennials,
adults under the age of 35,
freelance, a full 38%.
And by 2025, doing the
math, it'll be over 50%.
Over 50% of people
will be freelance.
Millennials are putting
together what I think
of as tapestry employment.
They're putting together a weave
of employment-- this and then
this and then that.
The jobs for life have
gone, for the most part,
or are disappearing.
>>REGINA: To work in a
factory for 30 years,
get your watch in retirement.
>>PAYNE: Or work
in a law practice
or work in
construction, whatever.
That's our grandfather
and father's time.
For some people it
might, with benefits
and all this sort of stuff.
Now, the reason
I'm mentioning this
is so many parents are
still putting their kids
in these super scheduled, like
every single day is scheduled
to within an inch
of the child's life.
And so the child is
learning to exist
within this tight
super scheduled world.
Then they graduate, and
they go into the work force,
and that super scheduled
world is all they know.
And it doesn't exist.
>>REGINA: It doesn't exist.
And this whole No Child
Left Behind, which
you have another name for--
>>PAYNE: I call it the
No Child Left Intact.
>>REGINA: I couldn't agree more.
And that whole failure
of teaching to the test
so you can essentially make
a monochromatic worker bee
species, more or less.
There's no texture.
>>PAYNE: Right.
Well, one of the things
that-- just dialing it
back and balancing
out a kid's life,
is that when you give them
space and you give them time,
they do very crucial thing.
Study after study has shown
that this amazing developmental
piece around play,
around free play,
they learn to be creative,
innovative, and adaptable.
Now, President Obama, in one of
the states of the nation speech
mentioned that we must create
this innovation economy.
It's very, very interesting.
He mentioned it three times.
It's very, very interesting,
innovation economy,
because it just is.
>>REGINA: Then they need to
scrap the current education
system.
>>PAYNE: Well, you see, if
you give our kids space--
you see, so much of
the education system,
we've got big concerns
about it, but it's
kind of outside our control.
But what's within our
control is our home life.
And within our sphere of
influence is our home life.
If we give our kids time to
creatively play, to innovate,
to problem solve,
they literally develop
parts of their emotional
being, of their brain,
of their emotional being.
So simplifying and balancing is
preparing kids for the future.
It's not going back to
"Little House on the Prairie."
It's not wishing
to go back in time.
It's actually preparing
kids for the future.
And look, you only have
to do it a little bit,
honestly, because the
passing grade is fairly low,
do you know what I mean?
There's a lot of real wacko
behavior going on out there.
We only have to simplify
and balance a little bit
to have a superstar kid.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And each one of us, every human
being, has their own destiny.
Let's talk about
how given the space,
children will reveal
their destiny,
kind of like the beginning
part of our conversation.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
Aristotle called that
telos, by the way.
Telos.
>>REGINA: Aristotle, yes.
>>PAYNE: Yeah, that each child
would come into the world
with a telos, with
a spirit seed,
with something that they
come to bring to this world.
Amazing concept.
And earlier on, we spoke
about this disorder and quirk
as a spectrum, that
kids can get on this--
they can be really
troubled, you dial it back,
you simplify, and
they become quirky.
But what's at the other end of
that spectrum is their genius.
The very thing that's
their so-called disorder,
if they have a simple and
balanced life, is their genius.
But it's the same.
And what's beautiful about it
is that the choices is ours.
If we create space
within their lives,
their genius, their gift,
their telos, their spirit seed,
can put down roots.
If we surround them in a
fever pitch and a tsunami
of too much too soon,
that spirit seed
is sitting there just
waiting, waiting.
Now, is it too late?
Does it shrivel up and die?
No, no, no.
It's very patient.
Telos is patient.
We can do this at 14,
15, 16 years of age.
>>REGINA: We can do
this at 40 or 50.
>>PAYNE: Can't we?
Yes, exactly.
It just waits very patiently.
And then down it--
and as parents,
what's so beautiful
is that we're actually
in full control of
that within our homes,
because at the
beginning of our talk,
I mentioned this really
difficult image of we're
living in the undeclared
war on childhood.
That's a dark image.
And we've got war around us.
What can we do about these
wars raging in the world?
But in the undeclared
war on childhood,
we can declare
peace in our homes.
We can be incredibly effective.
No one can stop us doing that.
We can do that and have our
children have a childhood.
>>REGINA: You have a
new book coming out.
>>PAYNE: Yeah, "Soul
of Discipline."
I've never met a disobedient
child in all my life.
And I've met some rascals.
I'm a counselor, right?
I don't believe in disobedience.
It's disorientation.
And what I'm really
talking about
is that how do we
orient our children?
How do we have discipline that
is both warm, firm, and calm?
And so in the "Soul
of Discipline" book,
I've really tried to talk about
the three developmental stages
that kids go through-- up
to about seven or eight,
then in their tween years,
and then their teen years.
And how can we shift
our discipline focus
to have kids recognize
that we're moving with them
and that our
understanding of where
they're up to in their
lives is being recognized.
So the "Soul of Discipline"
book is very much a companion
to the "Simplicity Parenting,"
very similarly themed.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And you're attracting
attention all over.
There may be a documentary,
HBO, coming out
on "Simplicity Parenting" and
following into the cultures
you visited all those years
ago forward, the effect
of our behavior in the world
we've created on our children
and how we can reverse that.
>>PAYNE: Yeah.
This movement has just--
it's gone from being
a movement to a community.
It's really interesting.
It's actually moved
into that dimension now.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
I'm so glad we
finally connected.
It was a little bit
to get us together,
and I'd love to have you back,
after the new book is out
and when you're in the midst
of-- because we didn't really
get into that subject today.
And anyway, I know
your schedule,
you're highly in
demand right now.
So thank you for
taking the time.
>>PAYNE: Oh, it's an
absolute pleasure.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: I consider
this book a must
read for parents and parents
to be, even grandparents.
Having personally seen the
results of this kind of child
rearing, "Simplicity Parenting"
cannot be recommended highly
enough.
You can find it through
all major booksellers.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]